[blog] React 19 migration for MUI X (#45348)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/react-19-update.md

---

> title: Migrating MUI X to React 19

Reviewer: I think we should be more descriptive with the title to make it clear right away that this is about _internal_ migration (rather than a guide for users on upgrading their MUI app to React 19). We could borrow from the description:

```suggestion
title: How we migrated MUI X to React 19
```

> description: How we migrated to React 19 while maintaining backward compatibility.

Reviewer: If you update the title to include some of this text, you could rephrase and expand on it like this in the description:

```suggestion
description: Learn how we migrated our library's codebase to React 19 while maintaining backward compatibility.
```

date: 2025-02-18
authors: ['arminmeh', 'alexfauquette']
tags: ['MUI X']
---

> [React 19 is out](https://react.dev/blog/2024/12/05/react-19) for some time now and we have finished migrating our codebase to it. If you are still having this migration in your backlog or you are interested in the details of our migration, read on.

Reviewer: Instead of linking to an external resource here, we could make this intro stronger by describing what this article is about in more detail. If you ever get stuck when writing an intro, you can read over your headers and subheaders and use those to summarize the content. It also helps to give more context surrounding why this topic matters, and identify your audience by stating who the article is for. If I do that, I get something like this—feel free to use it directly or rewrite in your own words:

```suggestion
As maintainers of a popular set of React UI components, we planned to migrate our library's codebase to React 19 as soon as possible after its stable release, which came at the end of 2024.
But a significant number of our users will continue to require React 18 support for some time, so we knew that maintaining backward compatibility was crucial.

This proved to be a major undertaking that required careful planning and execution. 
By breaking it down into two phases we were able to quickly provide React 19 compatibility for our users while we worked on our own migration.

This article describes our migration strategy, and how we addressed some of the key issues we encountered along the way.
We hope it may be useful to others who also need to support both versions of React in their codebase.
```

Author: I have used a part of this as an intro and I have moved the part about the migration strategy into that section (to avoid repetition)

## The migration strategy

It was crucial for us to keep supporting older React versions, so we approached the migration in two phases:

1. First, we added React 19 compatibility while keeping the codebase on React 18
2. Then we moved the entire codebase to React 19 while maintaining compatibility with previous React versions

This approach allowed early adopters of React 19 to use our packages while we were still finishing our own migration.

### Phase 1: Adding React 19 compatibility

> Our first step was checking the [list of breaking changes](https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#breaking-changes).

Reviewer: to be more clear

```suggestion
Our first step was checking the list of [breaking changes in React 19](https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#breaking-changes).
```

We were lucky that we didn't had to change much in the source code, but a lot of changes had to be done in the tests because of the changes related to [strict mode](https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#strict-mode-improvements) and [error reporting](https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#errors-in-render-are-not-re-thrown).

> These changes caused different call count for our spies and different console outputs, so we had to expect different values based on the React major.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These changes caused a different call count for our spies and different console outputs, so we had to expect different values based on the React major.
```

> `@mui/internal-test-utils` provides an export `reactMajor` that extracts the major version of the React version used in the test.

Reviewer 3: The goal is not to encourage them to use our `internal-test-utils` but to rewrite their own

````suggestion
:::info
To know which version of React is running, they provide a nice helper

```js
import * as React from 'react';
const reactMajor = parseInt(React.version, 10);
```
:::
````

Author: Not sure if we need the actual snippet 🤔

We are using that to conditionally set the test expectations.

> 

Reviewer 3: Not sure it will look better. But the two code blocks feel weird

```suggestion

#### Error message modification
```

```ts
const errorMessage1 = 'MUI X: Could not find the animation ref context.';
const errorMessage2 =
  'It looks like you rendered your component outside of a ChartsContainer parent component.';
const errorMessage3 =
  'The above error occurred in the <UseSkipAnimation> component:';
const expextedError =
  reactMajor < 19
    ? [errorMessage1, errorMessage2, errorMessage3]
    : `${errorMessage1}\n${errorMessage2}`;
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

#### Strict mode modification

```

```ts
// Spy call count
//   1x during state initialization
// + 1x during state initialization (StrictMode)
// + 1x when sortedRowsSet is fired
// + 1x when sortedRowsSet is fired (StrictMode) = 4x

// Because of https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#strict-mode-improvements
// from React 19 it is:
//   1x during state initialization
// + 1x when sortedRowsSet is fired
const expectedCallCount = reactMajor >= 19 ? 2 : 4;
```

### Performance issue

> In React 19, you can access `ref` as a prop for function components and `forwardRef` is not longer needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In React 19, you can access `ref` as a prop for function components. `forwardRef` is no longer needed.
```

> In React 19, you can access `ref` as a prop for function components. `forwardRef` is no longer needed.
> 
> This created an [issue](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/15770) for us, which was spotted by one of our community members.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In React 19, you can access `ref` as a prop for function components. `forwardRef` is no longer needed.
This created an [issue](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/15770) for us, which was spotted by one of our community members.
```

> This created an [issue](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/15770) for us, which was spotted by our community member.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This created an [issue](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/15770) for us, which was spotted by one of our community members.
```

> Because `ref` is now also a prop, spreading props after the ref prop could potentially override the ref.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because `ref` is now also a prop, spreading props after the ref prop could potentially override the ref.
```

> The existance of `ref` prop on a `ForwardRef` component, even if `undefined`, makes the component props referentially unstable, breaking the downstream memoizations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The existence of the `ref` prop on a `ForwardRef` component, even if `undefined`, makes the component props referentially unstable, breaking the downstream memoizations.
```

> The existence of the `ref` prop on a `ForwardRef` component, even if `undefined`, makes the component props referentially unstable, breaking the downstream memoizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The existence of the `ref` prop on a `ForwardRef` component—even if `undefined`—makes the component props referentially unstable, which breaks downstream memoizations.
```

> To address this, a `forwardRef` shim was added that enforces correct prop ordering at the type level.

Reviewer: passive -> active voice to make it clear who added this

```suggestion
To address this, we added a `forwardRef` shim that enforces the correct prop ordering at the type level.
```

```tsx
// Compatibility shim that ensures stable props object for forwardRef components
// Fixes https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/31613
// We ensure that the ref is always present in the props object (even if that's not the case for older versions of React) to avoid the footgun of spreading props over the ref in the newer versions of React.
export const forwardRef = <T, P = {}>(
  render: React.ForwardRefRenderFunction<T, P & { ref: React.Ref<T> }>,
) => {
  if (reactMajor >= 19) {
    const Component = (props: any) => render(props, props.ref ?? null);
    Component.displayName = render.displayName ?? render.name;
    return Component as React.ForwardRefExoticComponent<P>;
  }
  return React.forwardRef(
    render as React.ForwardRefRenderFunction<T, React.PropsWithoutRef<P>>,
  );
};
```

The shim provides two key benefits:

1. Type safety - TypeScript will warn if props are spread incorrectly
2. Forward compatibility - Components using the shim will work correctly in all supported React versions

> The code update was:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is how we implemented it:
```

```tsx
// Before
const GridRoot = forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  const state = useGridState();
  return <div ref={ref} {...props} {...state} />;
});

// After
const GridRoot = forwardRefShim((props, ref) => {
  const state = useGridState();
  return <div {...props} {...state} ref={ref} />;
});
```

## Phase 2: Moving to React 19

After ensuring compatibility, we started working on migrating the codebase to React 19. This involved:

> 1. Updating all package dependencies to their React 19 compatible versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Updating all package dependencies to their React 19-compatible versions
```

2. Migrating test utilities to work with React 19
3. Ensuring all components work with the new React 19 features
4. Updating CI to run tests with React 18

> 5. Type references with `RefObject` for React 19 and with `MutableRefObject` for earlier versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Type references with `RefObject` for React 19 and `MutableRefObject` for earlier versions
```

> Biggest change in this phase was arround the `useRef()` hook [update](https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#useref-requires-argument) and the fact that `apiRef` in the DataGrid component had to be updated from `MutableRefObject` to `RefObject` for React 19 only, in order to avoid type errors for users (and their CI) that did not migrate yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The biggest change in this phase was around the `useRef()` hook [update](https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#useref-requires-argument) and the fact that `apiRef` in the DataGrid component had to be updated from `MutableRefObject` to `RefObject` for React 19 only, in order to avoid type errors for users (and their CI) that did not migrate yet.
```

> The biggest change in this phase was around the `useRef()` hook [update](https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#useref-requires-argument) and the fact that `apiRef` in the DataGrid component had to be updated from `MutableRefObject` to `RefObject` for React 19 only, in order to avoid type errors for users (and their CI) that did not migrate yet.

Reviewer: Best practice: always aim for at least 3 words for anchor text. This is a really long sentence so I broke it up in two.

```suggestion
The biggest change in this phase was around the [`useRef()` hook update](https://react.dev/blog/2024/04/25/react-19-upgrade-guide#useref-requires-argument).
The `apiRef` in the Data Grid component had to be updated from `MutableRefObject` to `RefObject` for React 19 only, to avoid type errors for users who haven't migrated yet.
```

> As part of the migration we also moved to NextJS 15 for our documentation website.

Reviewer: Vercel styles it "Next.js": https://nextjs.org/blog/next-15

```suggestion
As part of the migration we also moved to Next.js 15 for our documentation website.
```

Reviewer: Maybe we could add some details about this migration? (Or maybe it would be better suited for its own blog post? I don't have a strong opinion but I am curious about what went into this, if there's anything noteworthy.)

### Our own `RefObject`

> To have different types for `apiRef` in the DataGrid component for different React versions, we created our own `RefObject` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide different types for `apiRef` in the Data Grid component for different React versions, we created our own `RefObject` type.
```

> We used the fact that `useRef()` requires a param for React 19 to have `RefObject` evaluated to `MutableRefObject` for React < 19 and to `RefObject` otherwise.

Reviewer: I usually hate the word "leverage" in software writing because it gets way overused but this is a rare case in which I think it's the appropriate word choice. 😁 Aside from that, I found this sentence difficult to parse, so I made an attempt at clarifying it based on my understanding.

```suggestion
We leveraged the fact that `useRef()` requires a param for React 19, and set it up so that `RefObject` would be evaluated to `MutableRefObject` for React <19, or else `RefObject` otherwise:
```

Reviewer 2: "Or else [..] otherwise" might be a bit redundant/a pleonasm? Perhaps something like this:

```suggestion
We leveraged the fact that `useRef()` requires a param in React 19 to ensure `RefObject` would be evaluated as `MutableRefObject` for React < 19, and as `RefObject` otherwise.
```

```ts
// in React 19 useRef requires a parameter, so `() => any` will not match anymore
export type RefObject<T> = typeof React.useRef extends () => any
  ? React.MutableRefObject<T>
  : React.RefObject<T>;
```

## Conclusion

> The migration to React 19 was a significant undertaking that required careful planning and execution. By breaking it down into two phases we were able to quickly provide React 19 compatibility for our users while we worked on our own migration.

Reviewer: If you take my suggestion to use this text in the intro, then I would cut it here and go straight into "The migration has helped us identify..."

```suggestion
```

Author: Left it here, since the intro was changed from the suggestion

> The migration has also helped us identify areas where we can further improve our components' type safety and performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The migration has helped us identify areas where we can further improve our components' type safety and performance.
```

Author: This was more forced by the migration, so I have rephrased it.

> It is worth noting that a big chunk of our own migration was done by the MUI Core team as they added support for React 19 to both `@mui/material` v5 and v6. Additionally, they provided the necessary updates to the internal tools that both of our repositories use for building and testing our components.

Reviewer: I think we should avoid using internal team names like "MUI Core" in this context because it's probably just confusing to most readers. If we want to shout out the Core team here I think we should just say "the maintainers of Material UI," and we should probably go further to name MUI X in this context to help reinforce the distinction. Here's how I'd write this:

```suggestion
Though this project was spearheaded by the MUI X team, we owe a special thanks to our colleagues who maintain Material UI for their massive help in adding React 19 support to both v5 and v6 of `@mui/material`.
They also provided the necessary updates to the internal tools that both of our repositories use for building and testing our components.
```

> It is worth noting that a big chunk of our own migration was done in the core team as they added support for React 19 to both `@mui/material` v5 and v6. Additionally, they have provided necessary updated to the internal tools that both of our repositories are using for building and testing of the components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is worth noting that a big chunk of our own migration was done by the MUI Core team as they added support for React 19 to both `@mui/material` v5 and v6. Additionally, they provided the necessary updates to the internal tools that both of our repositories use for building and testing our components.
```

---
title: How we migrated MUI X to React 19
description: Learn how we migrated our library's codebase to React 19 while maintaining backward compatibility.
date: 2025-02-25
authors: ['arminmeh']
tags: ['MUI X']
---

As maintainers of a popular set of React UI components, we planned to migrate our library's codebase to React 19 as soon as possible after its stable release, which came at the end of 2024.
This proved to be a major undertaking that required careful planning and execution.

This article describes our migration strategy, and how we addressed some of the key issues we encountered along the way.
We hope it may be useful to others who also need to support both versions of React in their codebase.

## The migration strategy

It was crucial for us to keep supporting older React versions, as many of our users rely on existing React 18 applications that can't be migrated immediately.

> We understand that upgrading major versions takes time and planning, especially in large production applications and we want to support our users' migration timeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We understand that upgrading major versions takes time and planning, especially in large production applications, and we want to support our users' migration timeline.
```

    return Component as React.ForwardRefExoticComponent<P>;
  }
  return React.forwardRef(
    render as React.ForwardRefRenderFunction<T, React.PropsWithoutRef<P>>,
  );
};
```

The shim provides two key benefits:

1. Type safety - TypeScript will warn if props are spread incorrectly
2. Forward compatibility - Components using the shim will work correctly in all supported React versions

This is how we implemented it:

```tsx
// Before
const GridRoot = React.forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  const state = useGridState();
  return <div ref={ref} {...props} {...state} />;
});

// After
const GridRoot = forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  const state = useGridState();
  return <div {...props} {...state} ref={ref} />;
});
```

## Phase 2: Moving to React 19

After ensuring compatibility, we started working on migrating the codebase to React 19. This involved:

1. Updating all package dependencies to their React 19-compatible versions (including docs website migration to Next.js 15)
2. Migrating test utilities to work with React 19
3. Ensuring all components work with the new React 19 features
4. Updating CI to run tests with React 18

> 5. Type references with `RefObject` for React 19 and `MutableRefObject` for earlier versions

Reviewer: this is the only list item that doesn't begin with a verb

```suggestion
5. Updating type references with `RefObject` for React 19 and `MutableRefObject` for earlier versions
```
